---
title: "fp-ts: Why?"
description: "This post explains why one should consider using fp-ts, a library for functional programming in TypeScript, to improve the safety, reliability, and readability of their code."
pubDate: "May 03 2023"
updatedDate: "May 08 2023"
heroImage: "/posts/fp-ts-why/pipes.png"
heroImageAlt: "A room full of pipes in the style of van gogh (AI Art)"
isUnlisted: true
---

## Why?

Why takes precedence over How in the beginning stages of learning anything. Therefore, before diving into the details of how to use [fp-ts](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/), it's important to first understand why one should consider using it.

### Safety

Take a look at the following type definition:

```ts
type FindItemFn = (items: string[], index: number) => string;
```

Given an array of strings, this function will attempt to return an item residing on a particular index. The returned item will be a string.

Let's implement this function and test it out:

```ts
const findItem: FindItemFn = (items, index) => {
  return items[index];
};

const items = ["foo", "bar", "baz"];

findItem(items, 0); // 'foo'

findItem(items, 2); // 'baz'
```

But what happens if we try to find an item that doesn't exist?

```ts
findItem(items, 5); // undefined
```

Even though we specified that the return type should be a `string`, we can sometimes get `undefined` when the code is executed. This can lead to unexpected errors and bugs.

Moreover, the above implementation doesn't handle `null` or `undefined` values, and it doesn't provide any information about why a value may be missing. This is where functional programming and the [Option](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/modules/Option.ts.html) monad from the fp-ts package come into play.

Functional programming is a paradigm that emphasises the use of immutable values and pure functions to avoid side effects and make programs more predictable and easier to grok. One of the key concepts in functional programming is the use of monads.

__What's a monad?__

A monad is a way of representing computations that can be composed together using a simple set of operations. Think of them as classes that only contain static methods.

For example, the `Option` monad in fp-ts can be used to represent computations that may or may not return a value.

Here's the type definition for the `findItem` function using the `Option` monad:

```ts
import { Option } from "fp-ts/Option";

type FindItemFn = (items: string[], index: number) => Option<string>;
```

Now let's implement the `FindItemFn` function again using the new type definition:

```ts
import { some, none } from "fp-ts/Option";

const findItem: FindItemFn = (items, index) => {
  const item = items[index];

  if (item) return some(item);
  else return none;
};
```

Here, we're using the `some` function to wrap the value of the `item` variable in an `Option` if it exists, and the `none` function to return an empty `Option` if it doesn't.

By returning an `Option` instead of a nullable value, we ensure that any code that uses the result of `findItem` must explicitly handle the possibility that the value may not exist. This helps to avoid null pointer errors and makes our code more predictable and easier to understand.

Let's see what happens when we call our new `findItem` function:

```ts
const items = ["foo", "bar", "baz"];

findItem(items, 0); // { _tag: 'Some', value: 'foo' }

findItem(items, 2); // { _tag: 'Some', value: 'baz' }

findItem(items, 5); // { _tag: 'None' }
```

In the first two examples, `findItem` returns a `Some` object that wraps the string value of the item that was found at the specified index. In the last example, `findItem` returns a `None` object, indicating that there is no item at the specified index. By using the `Option` monad, we have made it impossible to accidentally return a `null` or `undefined` value from this function, which reduces the likelihood of runtime errors and makes our code more reliable.

### Functions

The `fp-ts` package provides a wide range of functions that make it easier to work with common data types.

```ts
import { lookup } from "fp-ts/Array";

const findItem: FindItemFn = (items, index) => {
  return lookup(index)(items);
};

const items = ["foo", "bar", "baz"];

findItem(items, 0); // { _tag: 'Some', value: 'foo' }

findItem(items, 2); // { _tag: 'Some', value: 'baz' }

findItem(items, 5); // { _tag: 'None' }
```

In the above code block, we imported the [lookup](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/modules/Array.ts.html#lookup) function from the [Array](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/modules/Array.ts.html) monad of the `fp-ts` package and used it to implement the `findItem` function in a simpler way. The `lookup` function takes an index and an array as its arguments and returns an `Option` object containing the element at the specified index if it exists, or `None` if it does not.

By using the `lookup` function, we have eliminated the need to manually create `Option` objects and check for `undefined` values, making the code simpler and easier to read.

Let's look at another one of these functions:

```ts
type ChunkArrayFn = <T>(items: T[], chunkSize: number) => T[][];

const chunkArray: ChunkArrayFn = (items, chunkSize) => {
  const result = [];

  for (let i = 0; i < items.length; i += chunkSize) {
    result.push(items.slice(i, i + chunkSize));
  }

  return result;
};

chunkArray([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], 2); // [ [ 1, 2 ], [ 3, 4 ], [ 5, 6 ], [ 7 ] ]
```

Above is a TypeScript implementation of a function `chunkArray` that takes an array of items and a chunk size as parameters, and returns an array of arrays where each subarray contains a maximum of `chunkSize` items. The implementation works by using a loop to slice the original array into chunks of size `chunkSize`, which are then pushed to a `result` array.

```ts
import { chunksOf } from "fp-ts/Array";

const chunkArray: ChunkArrayFn = (items, chunkSize) => {
  return chunksOf(chunkSize)(items);
};

chunkArray([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], 2); // [ [ 1, 2 ], [ 3, 4 ], [ 5, 6 ], [ 7 ] ]
```

Here we improved the first implementation by using the [chunksOf](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/modules/Array.ts.html#chunksof) function from `Array` to achieve the same result with a more concise and readable implementation.

There are numerous functions available in fp-ts, some more useful than others. Consider taking a look at the docs of your favourite monad if you wish to simplify your code.

### Composability

Composability refers to the ability to combine small, reusable building blocks together to create more complex functionality. In the context of functional programming, this means using higher-order functions and other functional abstractions to build up functionality from smaller pieces of code.

__What's a higher-order function?__

It is a function that takes one or more functions as arguments or returns a function as its result. In other words, a higher-order function is a function that operates on functions.

```ts
type ApplyTwiceFn = <T>(fn: (value: T) => T, value: T) => T;

const applyTwice: ApplyTwiceFn = (fn, value) => {
  return fn(fn(value));
};

type Add3Fn = (num: number) => number;

const add3: Add3Fn = (num) => num + 3;

applyTwice(add3, 2); // 8
```

If you have used `map`, `filter` or `reduce` on an array, you have already used a higher-order function.

__How can we use higher-order functions with fp-ts?__

With pipes!

Functional programming is all about creating reusable, modular, and composable code. One of the key tools in achieving this is the [pipe](https://gcanti.github.io/fp-ts/modules/function.ts.html#pipe) function provided by fp-ts. `pipe` allows functions to be easily chained together.

For example, consider the following code:

```ts
const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

const evenNumbers = numbers.filter((v) => v % 2 === 0);
const squaresOfEvenNumbers = evenNumbers.map((v) => v ** 2);
const sumOfSquaresOfEvenNumbers = squaresOfEvenNumbers.reduce(
  (acc, v) => acc + v,
  0
); // 20
```

Here we used intermediate variables to obtain `sumOfSquaresOfEvenNumbers` for the given array of numbers.

```ts
import { pipe } from "fp-ts/function";
import { filter, map, reduce } from "fp-ts/Array";

const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

const sumOfSquaresOfEvenNumbers = pipe(
  numbers,
  filter((v) => v % 2 === 0),
  map((v) => v ** 2),
  reduce(0, (acc, v) => acc + v)
); // 20
```

And here we used `pipe` to compose a series of functions together from the `Array` monad to calculate the `sumOfSquaresOfEvenNumbers`.

We can now rewrite our `applyTwice` function using `pipe` to avoid nesting function calls.

```ts
import { pipe } from "fp-ts/function";

const applyTwice: ApplyTwiceFn = (fn, value) => {
  return pipe(value, fn, fn);
};
```

One of the primary benefits of using `pipe` is readability. By providing a clean and concise syntax for chaining functions together, `pipe` makes it easier to follow the flow of data through a program. This clarity can make code easier to understand, maintain, and modify over time.

Another important benefit of `pipe` is reusability. Because functions can be easily chained together, it's easy to create modular functions that can be reused throughout an application. This can save time and reduce code duplication, making development more efficient and effective.

```ts
import { pipe } from "fp-ts/function";
import { filter, map, reduce } from "fp-ts/Array";

const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

const filterEven = (items: number[]) =>
  filter<number>((v) => v % 2 === 0)(items);

const squareItems = (items: number[]) =>
  map<number, number>((v) => v ** 2)(items);

const getSum = (items: number[]) =>
  reduce<number, number>(0, (acc, v) => acc + v)(items);

const squaresOfEvenNumbers = pipe(numbers, filterEven, squareItems); // [4, 16]

const sumOfSquaresOfEvenNumbers = pipe(squaresOfEvenNumbers, getSum); // 20
```

Finally, the modularity and clarity of code that `pipe` provides can also make it easier to write unit tests. By breaking down functionality into smaller, more focused functions, it becomes simpler to test individual components of a program in isolation, making it easier to ensure code quality and correctness.

## Wrap up

We explored the reasons why one should consider using the fp-ts package. We discussed how functional programming and the `Option` monad from `fp-ts` can help write safer code by eliminating the possibility of accidentally returning `null` or `undefined` values. Additionally, we examined how fp-ts offers an extensive library of functions that simplify working with common data types. Apart from the benefits of safety and functions, fp-ts also offers significant composability advantages, resulting in code that is more concise, expressive, and easier to comprehend.
